Meeting Minutes: February 8, 2018 (approved March 8, 2018)


<div id="meeting_header_right" class="headered">
Elections Commission<br>
City and County of San Francisco<br>
Don Chan, Secretary<br>
</div>

<div class="headered">
Open Source Voting System Technical Advisory Committee<br>
Christopher Jerdonek, Chair<br>
Larry Bafundo, Vice Chair<br>
Carl Hage<br>
Roan Kattouw<br>
Tony Wasserman<br>
</div>

<div id="meeting_header_main" class="headered">
MEETING MINUTES<br>
Open Source Voting System Technical Advisory Committee<br>
of the San Francisco Elections Commission<br>
Thursday, February 8, 2018<br>
6:00 p.m.<br>
City Hall, Room 421<br>
1 Dr. Carlton B. Goodlett Place<br>
San Francisco, California 94102<br>
</div>

**Order of Business**


**1\. Call to Order & Roll Call**

Member Wasserman (in the absence of Chair Jerdonek and Vice Chair Bafundo)
called the meeting to order at 6:08 p.m. Present: Members Hage, Kattouw,
Wasserman. Excused absences: Chair Jerdonek, Vice Chair Bafundo. Also present:
Secretary Chan.

Member Hage moved that Member Wasserman chair the meeting in the absence of
the committee's Chair and Vice Chair. Member Kattouw seconded. The vote was
unanimous to approve.


**2\. General Public Comment**

There was no public.


**3\. Approval of Minutes of Previous Meeting**

Secretary Chan apologized for not having gotten the draft to the members
before the meeting. The minutes were reviewed by the members and corrections
and amendments were made. Member Kattouw moved to approve the draft January
15, 2018 meeting minutes with the discussed amendments. Upon voice vote the
motion carried 3-0.

Public comment: None.


**4\. Administration**

Member Wasserman has an engagement on February 21 so cannot attend the
Commission meeting. Neither can Member Kattouw. Both are available for the
March 21 meeting. Member Bafundo will be asked if he is available for
February.

Member Hage reported that he has been working with Chris on the site and was
able to replicate the build environment. The website and code for building it
has been updated.

Member Kattouw mentioned that the next Committee report will be due to the
Elections Commission sometime in April so it can be discussed at the next
Committee meeting.


**5\. Member Reports**

Member Hage found more information on what New Hampshire did with Prime III
(now called “One For All”). The New Hampshire Secretary of State wrote to
CAVO promoting their system. It might be useful for Chair Jerdonek to speak
with him.

Member Kattouw reported that he has been ill and hasn’t gotten done with his
“to-do” list and will report back the next meeting. He agreed that Chair
Jerdonek is probably the best person to try and touch base with the New
Hampshire Secretary of State for more information.

Member Wasserman attended a US Digital Services presentation at Stanford.
They appear to be doing okay under the current administration. One speaker
there was an expert on RFP's and might be a resource for the Committee on how
to do agile procurement in government projects.

The RFP for the interim voting system (in the packet) was not fully reviewed,
but there were some interesting portions discussed by the Committee members
(e.g. regarding open source).

Member Hage asked what equipment is used to examine, manage, and open
vote-by-mail ballot envelopes, whether that software is part of the Dominion
voting system or is a separate component, and whether the Committee wants to
address this topic.

Member Wasserman pointed out a discrepancy in the return email address in the
RFP. Overall the Committee had positive comments and noted that when Member
Bafundo attends the Commission meeting he should relay the Committee’s
compliments on the RFP to the Commission.

Public comment: None.


**6\. Project Background and Terminology**

Member Hage reviewed his “diffs” (included in the agenda packet). He said
there is a demo of Prime III that they can run and see how it works, and also
explained other changes offered to the Committee’s website. Member Kattouw
found it satisfactory and moved to approve it, seconded by Member Wasserman.
Upon voice vote the motion carried 3-0.

Public comment: None.


**7\. Project Management and Procurement**

The members discussed how to proceed with the topic of procurement. Member
Wasserman will contact the person from the US Digital Services organization
to see if a video conference can be set up for a future meeting. He will
confer with Member Bafundo about this.


**8\. Equipment Decisions and Implementation Plan**

The Committee reviewed Member Hage’s document. He said it starts with “Key
decisions.” He changed the wording in 5.3.1.4 (use of the word “accessible”).
They looked at section 5.3.1.1 the word “early/or” might be “and/or.” That
was the intended meaning from Member Hage.

The members read the document section by section and followed with comments:

Member Kattouw referred to the last bullet point of 5.3.1.2 (... vote by mail
ballot ... and no need for electricity to cast a vote) and suggested this be
put somewhere else.

Member Wasserman suggested new wording for the Heading of 5.3.1: “Should
precinct polling and Vote Centers use the same paper ballot as those used for
vote by mail?” For 5.3.1.3, “Should ballots that are hand-marked be
pre-printed or printed on demand?”

Member Wasserman brought up the question of whether an election could be held
without electricity. It was suggested that this is a higher-level policy
question for the Commission. The Commission’s position on this is unknown.
The members discussed different characteristics of scanner/printers used.
No conclusion was reached.

Member Wasserman, regarding 5.3.1.8, move the words “is used” to after the
parentheses.

Public comment:

Mr. Jim Soper said there was no mention of provisional ballots. Member Hage
will add clarification to this item in “voting types.” Mr. Soper also
mentioned the absence of citing a ballot marking device in 5.3.1.4.

Further edits were made. There was a mention of using singular vs plural
nouns/pronouns.

Member Kattouw raised a point for the 5th “pro” (... precinct vote counts are
available at the end of the day ...) that the results are essentially the
same with an optical scanner.

Member Wasserman suggested the word “create” rather than “make” in
“Background” and to change the phrase “election day machines” to “machines
used on election day.”

Public comment:

Mr. Jim Soper said there is no statement of keeping a running count total of
votes, or audit records of each voting machine.

There was a discussion regarding how this could be done and whether this is a
desired or necessary item. Member Hage said they should probably put pros and
cons for that in another decision point.

Member Wasserman suggested consistency in the use of the terms CVR and Cast
Vote Record in 5.3.1.4. Similarly, with the term “digital CVR” and
“electronic CVR.”

* #10, regarding batteries, there were no comments.
* #11, Member Wasserman suggested an introduction stating non-exclusivity.
* #12 what ballot size does SF use?
* #13 add “options include” above the colon;  also mention duplex printing
  by inkjet printers.
* #14 after the quote, put “(RADVM / RADM).”
* #15 randomization of ballots?There was a short discussion on this question
  and privacy of voters.
* #16 do open data rules have an impact on this? Member Kattouw said San
  Francisco is required to do CVRs. Chair Jerdonek might be able to answer or
  get answers to this item.

Member Wasserman commented that this is the overarching question on voting
integrity and capturing the actual vote. Member Wasserman posed that this is
one of many questions -- whether end-to-end verifiability is desired or even
possible, vis-à-vis open data rules and voter privacy, etc.

Member Wasserman said that it was important to make it clear that the
Committee has looked at this thoroughly and is aware of other work being done
on this issue. Member Hage mentioned that he inserted a piece on Los
Angeles’s usability of mail ballot design.

Member Wasserman thanked Member Hage for his work on this document and
recommended approval of it with edits. Member Kattouw moved to approve this
section with amendments. Member Hage seconded. Upon voice vote, the motion
carried 3-0. Member Hage will submit this for the committee's Git repository,
and further review and revision may occur.

Public comment:

Mr. Jim Soper said “end-to-end verifiability” depends on what you define it
as. He stated that he saw a State document that listed what documents are not
public records (and thus not accessible through FOIA), but ballot pictures are
not on the list. He was in support of ballot images.


**9\. Committee Recommendations**

There was no discussion regarding this topic.

Public comment: None.


**10\. Topics for future discussion**

Member Kattouw will attempt to complete the writing of the diffs he had noted
down previously (e.g. reproducibility). Member Hage offered to collaborate
with Member Kattouw on the topic of security and encryption.

Public comment:

Mr. Jim Soper mentioned that California Association of Clerks and Election
Officials (CACEO) is working on a risk-limiting audit (RLA) bill. It appears
to be a difficult task due to various counties' unwillingness to participate.
There was a question of what the current law regarding audits was.


**Adjourned at 8:41 p.m.**
