Meeting Minutes: April 12, 2018 (approved May 9, 2018)

<div id="meeting_header_right" class="headered">
Elections Commission<br>
City and County of San Francisco<br>
Don Chan, Secretary<br>
</div>

<div class="headered">
Open Source Voting System Technical Advisory Committee<br>
Christopher Jerdonek, Chair<br>
Larry Bafundo, Vice Chair<br>
Carl Hage<br>
Roan Kattouw<br>
Tony Wasserman<br>
</div>

<div id="meeting_header_main" class="headered">
MEETING MINUTES<br>
Open Source Voting System Technical Advisory Committee<br>
of the San Francisco Elections Commission<br>
Thursday, April 12, 2018<br>
6:00 p.m.<br>
City Hall, Room 421<br>
1 Dr. Carlton B. Goodlett Place<br>
San Francisco, California 94102<br>
</div>

**Order of Business**


**1\. Call to Order & Roll Call**

Chair Jerdonek called the meeting to order at 6:02 p.m. Present: Members
Hage, Jerdonek, Kattouw, Wasserman. Member Bafundo had an excused absence due
to working out of state. Member Wasserman left early at 8:46 p.m. during item
#9. Also present: Secretary Chan.


**2\. General Public Comment**

None.


**3\. Approval of Minutes of Previous Meeting**

This item was tabled until the next committee meeting.


**4\. Administration**

Member Wasserman summarized his report to the Elections Commission at the
Commission's March 21 meeting. He referred to TAC's letter to the Commission
about TAC's recommendations, and encouraged the Commission to request support
from the Mayor, Assemblyman Chiu and Senator Weiner for state funding for the
project. The Commission had no questions for him.

Chair Jerdonek mentioned that TAC members' terms end next month and that he
will ask the Commission to act on reappointments.

The Committee reviewed Member Kattouw’s draft of the third report from the
Committee to the Commission. Chair Jerdonek suggested that the parts covering
events other than the Committee’s work (e.g. the status of state funding, the
San Francisco Examiner articles, etc) could be put into a separate section of
the report and noted as background to the work the Committee took up. Chair
Jerdonek also asked Member Kattouw to include the last quote from the
Examiner article, after the reference to the recommendations letter to the
Commission. Member Kattouw will make the noted changes for submission to the
Commission at their May meeting.

Public comment: None.

Member Kattouw moved to approve the report with the changes, seconded by
Member Wasserman. The motion carried 4-0.

There was a discussion about scheduling the next TAC meeting to accommodate
members' schedules. It was proposed to try May 8 or 9.


**5\. Member Reports**

Member Hage reported speaking with Mitch Trachtenberg, a programmer and
freelance writer in Humboldt County, regarding the Humboldt County Election
Transparency Project and the Trachtenberg Election Verification System
(TEVS), which allows anyone with a computer to examine every single ballot
cast. The project was passed on to Wes Rishel to continue development. Member
Hage will get the source code from Wes to try it out. Member Wasserman asked
if it’s been licensed. Member Hage said he wasn't sure. Member Hage has still
not gotten Prime III's software to work yet.

Member Kattouw said he spoke at LibrePlanet. There is a link to the slides he
used in his presentation, in the report to the Commission. Someone at the
conference asked him if it would be possible to publish the ranked-choice
voting (RCV) data from San Francisco's elections. He said he would refer the
person to Chair Jerdonek.

Chair Jerdonek reported that, since the last Elections Commission meeting,
Slalom published their report. Three representatives from Slalom were at the
Commission meeting to answer questions, and the Commission approved the
Committee’s recommendations that were included in TAC's letter to the
Commission. The Chair of the Board of Supervisors' Budget Committee,
Supervisor Malia Cohen, wrote a letter to the State in support of state
matching funds for developing an open source voting system. There is a COIT
finance subcommittee meeting Friday, April 13 at 9 a.m. The Department is
asking for $6.8 million, but COIT has only recommended allocating $300,000.

He also referred to the RFI included in the agenda packet to upgrade San
Francisco's hiring process. The RFI is interesting in that it entertains an
agile approach. It might be useful as an example of how the process could
work for the open source voting project.

Member Kattouw commented that the document referenced a process the state of
Alaska is engaged in, which might be the same one that Member Bafundo
mentioned Jessie Polsilkin (the presenter at a previous TAC meeting) is
working with.

Chair Jerdonek noted on page 11 where they talk about a modular approach. He
mentioned that he didn’t have a chance to talk with New Hampshire yet but
still plans to.

Public comment: None.


**6\. Slalom Report**

Chair Jerdonek wanted the Committee to discuss Slalom's report in the hopes
of developing a "supplement" or response to it containing points of agreement
or disagreement.

Member Hage had some first impressions that Slalom didn’t do a deep analysis
of the costs, but rather assumed e.g. a generic web architecture, with
numbers plugged in for that. Member Wasserman said it looked like they were
describing a system that was custom made, and thus had higher expense
estimates.

The discussion raised issues with how the report did not figure costs on a
modular basis or at different stages of development. Nor did it present
options of less expensive items versus more expensive items. So the final
estimates do not accurately reflect possible costs of developing an open
source system as opposed to a proprietary one.

Chair Jerdonek said that two years ago, the Commission had six groups present
their estimates of developing a system. Those estimates ranged from $3
million to $14 million (with OSET on the high end). Of those groups, Slalom
spoke only with OSET to arrive at their estimates. He said the proposed $1
million discovery phase is not agile and questioned Slalom's estimates of a
central ballot scanner costing the same as a reporting system.

Member Kattouw said they didn’t make comparisons to the work of other
jurisdictions.

Member Hage said that certification doesn’t include many things, for example
the reporting system. It wasn’t clear how Slalom reached their numbers for
the cost of certification.

Generally, it was felt that the figures arrived at by Slalom don’t closely
reflect the costs of developing an open source system.

Chair Jerdonek suggested that the Committee review the report, maybe 15 pages
at a time, and compose responses to their findings. Member Wasserman
suggested taking on the report and preparing responses to a short list of key
issues arising from the Slalom report that the Commission desires a
resolution on.

It was decided to review the first five sections for the next meeting. Chair
Jerdonek said members could also refer to Mr. David Cary’s questions while
reading the report (also included in the packet).

Public Comment:

Mr. W. Adam Koszek asked if a security audit was planned for the project. He
wanted to know how other open source efforts were being carried out. He was
referred to links in the Committee’s recommendations document.

Mr. Sergey Armishev asked if the major goal of open source was to prevent
foreign or domestic hacking of elections. There should be a cost assigned to
this aspect. There needs to be a clear goal of security budgeted in the
project.

Ms. Mirka Morales asked what the cost estimates were that the Commission got
a couple years back, and where she could learn more about licenses.

Member Wasserman said 50% of open software projects use General Public
License (GPL).

Mr. Sergey Armishev said the Committee should make a list of risks for the
project. Chair Jerdonek said there wasn’t one but if he wanted to put one
together he is welcomed to do so. Member Wasserman referred him to the Slalom
report and the risks they compiled.

Mr. W. Adam Koszek asked about a document for frequently asked questions.
The answer is that it is currently listed as "to do."


**7\. Voting System Component Development**

Chair Jerdonek proposed developing a component, like the reporting component,
as something the Committee could do as a group to show how it could be done
at a cost much lower than what Slalom estimated. If this worked, it could
call into question the other estimated costs.

Member Kattouw commented that there already exists some form of that
component in other jurisdictions (e.g. New Hampshire).

There was a discussion about how to tackle this given Brown and Sunshine
restrictions. This need not be constructed as a TAC sub-committee. Chair
Jerdonek asked if Member Hage could begin putting something together, and if
other members want to review it before the next meeting, they can reach out
to him. Member Hage said he could write up a design architecture
specification and some decisions to be made for the general approach. If an
output format for the “totaler” can be arrived at, he can provide some sample
data to run with. Interested members of the public could also contribute.

Public comment:

Mr. W. Adam Koszek asked what input Slalom sought to come up with their cost
figures.

Member Kattouw said it appeared basically to be OSET.

Mr. W. Adam Koszek asked if there were estimates on the cost of the new
system interacting with the current system.

Ms. Mirka Morales asked about the Los Angeles project and if they have their
scanner yet.

Mr. Sergey Armishev asked how the public could have a role in reviewing
and acceptance of TAC's processes and practices.


**8\. Project Background and Terminology**

Chair Jerdonek referred to Member Hage's document that was brought up last
meeting. Member Hage sent it out only late today so members have not had time
to review it. It will be added to the agenda packet on the Committee’s
website later. Member Kattouw will review it “off-line” and comment on it at
the next meeting.

Member Hage said he added sections 8.1.6 and 8.1.14.4: Hardware Security
Module and the Trusted Platform module.

Chair Jerdonek raised the question of whether the terminology section should
include descriptions of concepts that are not actually in use versus those
that have a real application. Member Hage felt that it's useful to have
descriptions of all concepts that make for a fuller background of the field.
It was discussed to make a distinction between those that are in actual use
and those which are possible, but not necessarily in wide use currently.

Public comment:

Mr. W. Adam Koszek suggested the use of words like “shall,” “may,” and
“might” in the document.

Mr. Sergey Armishev said to consider reporting on what was done including
what went wrong, and recommendations that address those mistakes.


**9\. Equipment Decisions and Implementation Plan**

The Committee reviewed Member Hage’s “diff” (see the agenda packet). A short
discussion was held regarding machine marking ballots with QR codes for
identification and security to protect against substitution of ballots, and
hand-marking ballots. Georgia’s process and San Mateo’s (Eastlake system)
were mentioned as examples. It was felt that this description needed to be
shortened to be a single bullet point in the “pros” list, rather than the
entire paragraph.

Member Wasserman departed from the meeting at 8:46 PM.

Member Hage said he’d re-work the wording for those items. The point about
RCV should say there is no upper limit.

There was a discussion about configuring scanners for the purpose of
recording or recalling ballot results. Member Hage mentioned that VSAP (Los
Angeles County) doesn’t scan printed ballots.

Chair Jerdonek commented that remote accessible vote-by-mail system (RAVBM)
using COTS hardware must be operable on COTS hardware. The statement
concerning ballot size needs re-working. He asked Member Hage to re-write the
first section, and include the edits discussed tonight in the rest of the
document.

With the noted edits, Member Kattouw moved to accept Member Hage's changes,
and all edits discussed tonight, from “Extra machines provide redundancy vs.
a single disability-access machine.” Chair Jerdonek seconded. The motion
carried 3-0.

Public comment:

Mr. Sergey Armishev said he liked the way it was formatted, but missing was
an explanation on how it can be hacked. He felt different scenarios need to
be enumerated.

There was a discussion related to security risks due to software, which
Member Kattouw said he would write a patch to address.


**10\. Committee Recommendations**

The document Member Hage provided for this item had not been analyzed deeply
by the Committee because it was included late, so the Committee had a general
discussion about several of the points brought up by Member Hage. Questions
included whether the points were all recommendations, whether some points set
the bar so high they may not be achievable, and whether some could be placed
in the appendix. Under hardware issues, members discussed the use of
read-only files, secure boot, and hardware cryptographic devices. There also
was a discussion around the pros and cons of "containers" and whether they
should be recommended versus stating them as a possible option to meet more
general criteria.

Member Hage said he intended for these points to be discussed and explored.
Member Kattouw agreed to this need.

Member Hage felt security should be raised to the level of a component of the
deliverables.

Chair Jerdonek thought that first point (regarding security) could be moved
to assumptions. He felt that security couldn’t be a separate deliverable.
There wasn’t a conclusion reached on this topic.

Public comment:

Mr. Sergey Armishev asked whether San Francisco was aiming to use a dedicated
voting machine or just a general purpose server. He also asked how many
people would need to be involved, and what skill level staff would need to
support the machines.


**11\. Topics for future discussion**

None were suggested.


**Adjourned at 10:32 p.m.**
