Draft Meeting Minutes: February 13, 2020

<div id="meeting_header_right" class="headered">
Elections Commission<br>
City and County of San Francisco<br>
</div>

<div class="headered">
Open Source Voting System Technical Advisory Committee<br>
Christopher Jerdonek, Chair<br>
Roan Kattouw, Vice Chair<br>
Carl Hage<br>
Tony Wasserman<br>
</div>

<div id="meeting_header_main" class="headered">
MEETING MINUTES (DRAFT)<br>
Open Source Voting System Technical Advisory Committee (OSVTAC)<br>
of the San Francisco Elections Commission<br>
Thursday, February 13, 2020<br>
6:00 p.m.<br>
City Hall, Room 421<br>
1 Dr. Carlton B. Goodlett Place<br>
San Francisco, California 94102<br>
</div>

**Order of Business**

**1\. Call to Order & Roll Call**

Chair Jerdonek called the meeting to order at 6:01 p.m. Present: Members
Hage, Jerdonek, Kattouw, Wasserman. The committee has one vacancy.


**2\. General Public Comment**

None.


**3\. VotingWorks Presentation**

Chair Jerdonek reported that Ben Adida of VotingWorks had to cancel his
appearance at today's meeting. He was very apologetic but would like to
attend the April meeting if possible.

The committee proceeded to discuss VotingWorks's open source risk-limiting
audit (RLA) software anyways, which is called Arlo and is the successor
of the RLA software written by Free & Fair and used by the State of Colorado.

After discussion, Member Wasserman moved that TAC adopt the following
recommendation for presentation to the Elections Commission, the Department
of Technology, and the Department of Elections:

> TAC recommends that the Department of Elections and the Department of Technology review the status and roadmap of the open source Arlo project (available at https://github.com/votingworks/arlo) for possible use for risk-limiting audits in San Francisco (including for ranked-choice voting contests) and to report on the findings and use them in future planning.

Seconded by Member Hage.

Public comment: None.

The motion passed unanimously (4 - 0).


**4\. Los Angeles County VSAP (Voting Solutions for all People)**

Chair Jerdonek reported that Los Angeles County's VSAP was in the news a lot
recently and mentioned the documents in the agenda packet. Member Hage
summarized the background and some of the recent controversy.

The committee proceeded to discuss some of these issues, including whether
LA County would ever make the system open source.

Chair Jerdonek mentioned that Smartmatic contacted him about the hardware
that Smartmatic manufactured for Los Angeles County's VSAP.  They will be
selling that hardware to other jurisdictions and are willing to answer
questions.

The committee also discussed California SB 360 (2013-2014), which includes
the requirement of being disclosed source.

Public comment: None.


**5\. San Francisco's Open Source Voting Project**

Chair Jerdonek reported that he delivered to the Commission TAC's
recommendation of nine "next steps" for the open source voting project that
TAC adopted at its last meeting. The Commission voted to request that
Director Gerull provide her response to the recommendations, so that should
be happening next week.

Chair Jerdonek also summarized an open letter that a group named OSES (Open Source Election Systems) sent to the City and County of San Francisco.
TAC discussed the contents of the letter.

Member Kattouw said the letter sounded appealing, but it lacked details.
Member Wasserman said he wanted to see a roadmap.

Member Wasserman moved that TAC invite representatives of OSES to attend one
of TAC's next meetings at their earliest convenience, to discuss details
around their letter. Seconded by Member Kattouw.

Public comment: None.

The motion passed unanimously (4 - 0).


**6\. Approval of Minutes of Previous Meetings**

Chair Jerdonek apologized that he didn't have any of the draft minutes
documents ready, so this agenda item was skipped.


**7\. Administration**

Committee members said our regular next meeting day of March 12 would work
for everyone. Member Kattouw can attend the next Elections Commission meeting
to report on TAC's activities.

Member Kattouw reported that he had started the tri-annual report that was
due in January but hadn't finished it yet. Chair Jerdonek thought it would
be better to have the report ready for next month's meeting as opposed to
trying to finish it during the meeting.

Public comment: None.


**8\. Member Reports**

Member Hage reported that he read the California Voting System Standards
(CVSS). He noticed that in doing our own recommendations document, we were
rewriting a lot of that content. He said that the CVSS requires all reports
produced by the system to be digitally signed, but he has never seen evidence
of digitally signed files. He was wondering if this issue could be taken
up by the Commission on a broader scale.

Member Hage said he found that a number of other counties use OmniBallot,
so he was able to get more data, including translations.

Chair Jerdonek gave an update on Santa Clara County's Citizens' Advisory Commission on Elections (CACE) motion to support collaborating with
San Francisco on an open source voting system.  They want to know what
collaborating with San Francisco would "look like."  Chair Jerdonek said
they need to be in touch with Director Gerull to find this answer, so he is
working on connecting them.

Public comment: None.


**9\. Topics for future discussion**

Member Wasserman mentioned two items: inviting OSES to a future meeting,
and seeing if the committee can have further discussion with the Department
of Technology.

Member Hage suggested discussing the results of any research we do on
RLA software.

Chair Jerdonek asked the committee members if they would be interested in
having Smartmatic attend to discuss their hardware, since we are already
having OSES and VotingWorks. Committee members thought sometime over the
summer might be good, after OSES speaks with us in March and VotingWorks in
April.

Public comment: None.


**10\. Voting System Component Development**

*Attendance for the remainder of the meeting is optional for committee members, as noted in the agenda.*

Member Wasserman departed at the beginning of this item.

Member Hage reported on his progress, including processing the OmniBallot
data. Member Kattouw noted that the Department of Elections had posted the
HTML summary for the zero report, but not any of the detail files. Member
Hage asked if there was any way we could find the date the detail files will
be available.

Members agreed to schedule a special meeting to work on ORR either the
Friday before the election, or the weekend before that, depending on the
availability of rooms and when the zero report data would be ready from
the Department.

Committee members discussed possibilities for reporting more detailed
registration data, including registration by party.

Public comment: None.


**Adjourned at 9:19 p.m.**
