Meeting Minutes: August 30, 2017

<div id="meeting_header_right" class="headered">
Elections Commission<br>
City and County of San Francisco<br>
Don Chan, Secretary<br>
</div>

<div class="headered">
Open Source Voting System Technical Advisory Committee<br>
Christopher Jerdonek, Chair<br>
Larry Bafundo, Vice Chair<br>
Carl Hage<br>
Roan Kattouw<br>
Tony Wasserman<br>
</div>

<div id="meeting_header_main" class="headered">
MEETING MINUTES<br>
Open Source Voting System Technical Advisory Committee<br>
of the San Francisco Elections Commission<br>
Wednesday, August 30, 2017<br>
</div>

**Order of Business**

**1\. Call to Order & Roll Call**

Chair Jerdonek called the meeting to order at 6:01 p.m. Present: Members
Bafundo, Hage, Jerdonek, and Wasserman. Member Kattouw had an excused
absence. Also present: Secretary Chan.

**2\. General Public Comment**

Mr. David Cary welcomed the committee members and commended them for their
service. Mr. Brent Turner echoed those sentiments and referred the members to
the New York Times op-ed in support of open-source voting.

**3\. Approval of Minutes of Previous Meeting**

Chair Jerdonek commended the Secretary for his work on the minutes. Member
Wasserman moved to approve, seconded by Member Hage. The motion carried
unanimously.

**4\. Member Reports**

Chair Jerdonek reported that he attended the annual conference of the
Elections Center in Orange County. He spoke about open source voting as part
of a panel. Additionally, he mentioned that Colorado has enlisted a
contractor to develop an open source elections auditing system. That software
development can be followed on GitHub. Colorado is deciding what type of
license they will get. (They don’t presently have one.) There
is a GitHub issue accepting comments on this issue.

Chair Jerdonek further reported that AB 668, dealing with providing matching
funds for voting equipment, now has a definition of open source software
(provided by San Francisco). Unfortunately, the definition is not actually
used in the legislation. Finally, Chair Jerdonek said that the Department of
Elections has selected a contractor (Slalom) from responses to its RFP to
produce a business plan to move toward open source voting.

Member Hage said that he has been researching standards for voting systems.
The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has some working
groups. It is tied to the U.S. Election Assistance Commission (EAC), so what
San Francisco develops should probably be consistent and congruent to this
endeavor. There was a short discussion regarding how individuals could work
with this group (e.g. members of the Committee). Chair Jerdonek said that as
long as members work on this as individuals and not as representatives of the
Committee, there should be no problem working with them.

Member Bafundo commented on the op-ed. He felt that it questions the value of
open source with respect to security. Member Wasserman cited the Coverity
study as relevant to this issue.

Public Comment:

Ms. Mirka Morales asked when the Committee would be engaging input from lay
people.

**5\. Administration**

Chair Jerdonek reported that a request has been put in for committee members
to get SFGov email addresses. He also reported that he started a webpage for
the Committee on GitHub. He created an organizational account so that
committee members could be listed as members.

The meeting schedule for the rest of the year seems to be problematic due to
holidays and members’ personal travel commitments. It will be dealt with on a
month by month basis until a possible regular schedule can be found.

For representation at the Elections Commission meetings, Member Wasserman
will attend in September and Member Bafundo will attend in October.

**6\. Current voting system and election processes**

Chair Jerdonek spoke with Director Arntz about the Committee examining the
equipment used for elections, but all the equipment is stored away so it
would not be easily accessible. He referred members to the document in the
binder, which listed ten different components of the elections system. This
would give members a sense of what is involved.

Member Hage wanted to look at the audit and revision management controls
(software). Chair Jerdonek said that the EMS (Election Management System) is
not part of the voting system but ballot design (part of the Dominion system)
is.

There was a short discussion regarding various questions: what is and is not
part of the EMS, such as voters registration, candidate filing, contest
definitions. What is used to validate electronic vote casting. How much of
the entire system needs to be open to be adequately transparent.

The main hardware components known to be needed are high-volume ballot
scanners in the central office, precinct-based ballot scanners, and
accessible voting devices. Some questions are whether print-on-demand will be
needed, and the advantage of having distributed tallies vs centralized
tallies (except for quickness of results). What is the security of
photo-scanning ballots and transferring the data as compared to examining the
paper?

Chair Jerdonek summarized how the current system works once a ballot is cast.

Public Comment:

Ms. Mirka Morales commented that current machines print two tapes at the end
of the night, one for the polling place and the other transported to the
central office.

Mr. David Cary suggested viewing the poll-worker manual and videos. The
Secretary of State has a list of what each county is using for their
elections. He said that if people come to City Hall to vote, their ballots
aren’t vote-by-mail ballots, but rather provisional ballots.

Mr. Jim Soper noted a website that had a diagram of voting procedures.

Mr. Brent Turner suggested looking to New Hampshire’s Prime III system to get
away from a vendor mindset. He mentioned the Dechert paper-ballot printing
system which removes the need for remaking ballots (as San Francisco does),
and that an audit or ballot image does not override the security of a first
count at the precinct before transporting ballots. He was asked to explain
his disappointment with the Los Angeles County project. He said that they
have gone through major grant contracts (more than $15 million) but have
nothing to show for it. Moreover, the blueprint given to them by Alan Dechert
in 2006 has just been put aside and ignored.

Ms. Mirka Morales commented that checking the 1% tally from last year’s
election didn’t give her any idea of what the results were, and is not
transparent.

Mr. Brent Turner said that a 100% precinct count with public involvement is
the best option for security, accuracy, and confidence.

Ms. Mirka Morales added that when counting ballots downstairs in City Hall,
it would be better to have a screen that shows an actual ballot so you can
see what is being scanned, which is not the case now.

Mr. Brent Turner said that Dominion has a system being reviewed by the
Secretary of State for certification and might be a system available to San
Francisco as an interim system.

**7\. Document template for Committee recommendations**

[Items 7-10 refer to a draft document from the Chair that was included in the
agenda packet. The approved version will be displayed on the Committee's
website and stored in a project under the Committee’s GitHub account.]

Chair Jerdonek explained that the document has been divided into 4 parts so
that each topic could be addressed separately. He said it would be good to
solicit substantive comments and feedback from the public on GitHub.
Non-substantive changes could be dealt with between meetings, while
substantive suggestions could be brought back to committee meetings for
discussion.

Public Comment:

Mr. Jim Soper expressed concern over the accessibility of GitHub to the
average viewer.

Mr. David Cary agreed that what the committee produces should be publicly
accessible. He thought that multiple separate reports might be more useful
than a single ever-growing report.

Mr. Brent Turner commented that with all the attention being given to
election security, there is the possibility of being inundated with comments
by vested interests against open-source voting.

Chair Jerdonek asked if there was a motion to adopt the draft as a starting
point. Member Hage so moved. Member Bafundo seconded. By voice vote the
motion passed unanimously.

Chair Jerdonek made a follow-up motion to add language to the document that
will clearly indicate its draft origination and to allow him to make
administrative content changes on the site (spellings, broken links, other
design and appearance issues, etc). Member Bafundo seconded the motion. By
voice vote the motion passed unanimously.

**8\. Committee Goals**

Chair Jerdonek reviewed the points in the draft. Member Bafundo suggested the
following language for the 2nd paragraph:

> that the TAC’s focus is to establish parameters that would guide the
development of the future voting system.

And possibly: “establishing boundaries and best practices or principles.”

Last sentence to the 2nd paragraph: “the focus of this effort is to establish
parameters and recommendations--not requirements--that would guide the
development of the future voting system.”

Member Hage wanted to add “establish recommended requirements.” He wanted to
include “ensuring the integrity of the process is another aspect” to the
goals.

He had an issue with the use of the word specs (the last bullet point) and
after discussion about its definition he thought possibly adding the word
“detailed” would clear it up. He also commented about accounting for
requirements outside of California.

Member Wasserman thought it would be better to say “the committee will give
priority to the needs of San Francisco but will draw upon knowledge of other
systems and jurisdictions as is appropriate.”

We should not spend time and money trying to build something for everyone and
end up with a suboptimal system for San Francisco.

Member Wasserman: “the committee’s recommendations will prioritize the voting
system needs of San Francisco without emphasizing the needs of other
jurisdictions....”

Public Comment:

Mr. Brent Turner encouraged the Committee to hold the line on the quality of
the project against detractors.

Mr. David Cary referred to the EMS in the Scope section, saying that if the
definition was just the voter registration system, then EMS shouldn’t be
included in developing the OSV system, but it should not be extended to
include the exclusion of vote-tracking and compilation.

He said the Committee’s document should try to distinguish notes from actual
content, for example by using brackets or some other formatting.

He further hoped that the Committee would be in the position to offer input
into the contractor’s report and plan, maybe in advance of its publication.
That way it will be in its best form to go forward.

Mr. Jim Soper said the committee needs to try to make this process as easy as
possible for the Director.

The answer to the question of whether the contractor will have any
interaction with the committee and thus be responsive to any recommendations
the committee might have is not known at this time. Chair Jerdonek offered to
discuss this with the Director and possibly bring it up at the next
Commission meeting.

Chair Jerdonek called for a motion to approve the edits made to the text of
sections discussed. Member Bafundo so moved, and Member Hage seconded. Upon
voice vote, the motion passed unanimously.

**9\. Open Source Voting Project Resources**

Chair Jerdonek said making this section its own agenda item was suggested by
Deputy City Attorney White. Listed are just some things to start off with. He
asked if members had other suggestions. Member Hage said it might be helpful
to add a description to each link so that readers wouldn’t have to click each
link to find out. Member Wasserman suggested links to the Open Source
Initiative's home page (OSI), GitHub, and the NIST link. When asked about
international open source voting systems, Member Wasserman thought there
might be one in Paris, and one in the Netherlands. OpenCount and Verified
Voting were mentioned as other possibilities.

Public Comment:

Mr. Brent Turner expressed concern about adding links to ”private vendors.”
He felt that links to the pioneers of this work should be included in the
list.

Ms. Mirka Morales questioned whether people should be required to
self-identify as a vendor.

Mr. Brent Turner thought that references to non-vendors should be on the
list, for example Open Voting Consortium and the University of Florida.

Member Hage said that each member could come up with items and email them to
the Chair and Secretary for compilation and review at the next meeting.

Chair Jerdonek asked Mr. David Cary about his previous website suggestion. He
said they were from the Secretary of State’s website, mentioned in the RFP.

Chair Jerdonek asked for a motion to accept this list as a starting point.
Member Hage so moved, seconded by Member Bafundo. Upon voice vote, the motion
carried unanimously.

**10\. Committee Recommendations**

Chair Jerdonek briefly went over his initial thoughts about various topics
that the Committee could be working on. On the interim system: it should
allow interoperability with an open source system. It should also follow
publicly specified standards.

Under project management, he felt the Committee should recommend a timeline
for the department.

Member Bafundo thought they should encourage city ownership of the project,
and be agile in its implementation and phases.

There are outstanding decision points and questions around: ballots on demand
or not, use of vote centers, and other policy matters. The Department should
make decisions earlier than later.

Under Open Source: Chair Jerdonek said that San Francisco, unlike Colorado,
should have an open source license from day one.

Member Wasserman suggested adding the word “approved” open source license to
item #2. There was a short discussion about GPLv3 and other licenses like BSD.

Public Comments:

Mr. David Cary said that the recommendations for the interim voting system is
not realizable, that there are no approved public standards for
interoperability, but it’s good to have it stated. He felt that under project
management he would “decouple” the project plan and timeline from the RFP. He
also recommended the advocacy of an agile project implementation process.

Mr. Brent Turner also supported the use of General Public License v3.

Chair Jerdonek said he agreed with Mr. David Cary’s suggestion to remove the
first point under Project Management and say the Department should develop a
plan “as soon as possible” rather than specifically saying before the RFP for
the interim system.

Member Wasserman said it would be important to have discussion about CLAs
included.

Mr. David Cary suggested explaining the term CLA in the document.

Member Wasserman moved to accept this section with edits. Member Hage
seconded. Upon voice vote, the motion carried unanimously.

**11\. Written Report to the Elections Commission**

Chair Jerdonek explained this is a very basic first report to the Commission,
to which will be attached the approved recommendations document from this
meeting, the approved minutes of the last meeting, and also a screen shot of
the website. This will give the Commission an idea of how the Committee is
progressing. He said he wanted to add another section header for “Meetings.

Public Comment: None.

Member Wasserman moved to approve the report, seconded by Chair Jerdonek.
Upon voice vote the motion carried unanimously.

**12\. Topics for future discussion**

Chair Jerdonek wants to list out phases of the project to be more “agile” and
to look at project management and procurement. Member Bafundo offered to look
into inviting a speaker on the topics of project management and procurement.

Chair Jerdonek told the members if they did think of anything for future
meetings they should get it to him by the Monday of the week prior to the
meeting.

Public Comment:

Mr. David Cary commended the Chair on the work to organize and prepare
tonight’s meeting, and hoped as the Committee gets going, that more committee
members contribute.

Member Hage said he’d be interested in knowing what the costs are for holding
elections so they can be compared to estimated costs with open source.

Member Bafundo asked Chair Jerdonek if he wanted the members to come to the
next meeting ready with text or discussion to build out the topics covered in
tonight’s recommendations document. The chair replied yes but that text
should be sent in advance of the meeting to allow preparation of the agenda
and agenda packet.

Member Wasserman wanted to see the winning proposal for the RFP, if possible.

Member Bafundo thought it would be beneficial to put some thought around
"assumptions" to help frame the committee’s thinking going forward.

There was a short discussion regarding setting the time for the next meeting.
The third Thursday (September 21) seemed to be okay for all. Secretary Chan
will confirm this with members.

**Adjourned at 9:07 p.m.**
