Meeting Minutes: April 11, 2019 (approved May 14, 2019)

<div id="meeting_header_right" class="headered">
Elections Commission<br>
City and County of San Francisco<br>
William Walker, Secretary<br>
</div>

<div class="headered">
Open Source Voting System Technical Advisory Committee<br>
Christopher Jerdonek, Chair<br>
Roan Kattouw, Vice Chair<br>
Carl Hage<br>
Brandon Philips<br>
Tony Wasserman<br>
</div>

<div id="meeting_header_main" class="headered">
MEETING MINUTES<br>
Open Source Voting System Technical Advisory Committee (OSVTAC)<br>
of the San Francisco Elections Commission<br>
Thursday, April 11, 2019<br>
6:00 p.m.<br>
City Hall, Room 421<br>
1 Dr. Carlton B. Goodlett Place<br>
San Francisco, California 94102<br>
</div>

**Order of Business**

**1\. Call to Order & Roll Call**

Chair Jerdonek called the meeting to order at 6:10 p.m. Present: Members
Hage, Jerdonek, Kattouw. Excused absence: Member Wasserman. Unexcused absense:
Member Philips. Also present: Secretary Walker.


**2\. General Public Comment**

None.


**3\. Open Source Voting Project Plan** (6:11 p.m.)

Chair Jerdonek:

* reported that representatives from the Department of Technology, although
  invited, were not present. City CIO Gerull sent Chair Jerdonek an email
  with an update.

* stated that CIO Gerull met with members of the California Clean Money
  Campaign to discuss the Department of Technology supporting a proposal from
  the California Clean Money Campaign to receive up to $8 million in matching
  funds from the California State Legislature to develop an Open Source
  Voting System. CIO Gerull gave recommendations to the California Clean
  Money Campaign, prepared budget request materials to present to the
  Committee on Information Technology Finance Committee, began drafting
  voting system requirements documents, and is preparing to begin discussing
  the full Open Source Voting System Project Plan with the larger community.

* announced that the Open Source Voting Project Community Organizing
  meeting, to be convened by the Department of Technology on April 26 at 3pm,
  at 1 South Van Ness Avenue, San Francisco.

* suggested that OSVTAC members share the announcement with their personal
  networks once the meeting announcement was made available by the Department
  of Technology;

* suggested that Elections Commission meeting attendees, those who attended
  the last Open Source Voting conference style event in 2015, software
  companies and vendors were all examples of potential invitees to the April
  26 meeting.

* Members generated the following list of organizations to invite:

  * Californians for Electoral Reform (CfER)
  * CivicActions
  * Code for America
  * Electronic Frontiers Foundation (EFF)
  * FairVote California
  * Global Election Technology Summit (GET Summit)
  * Open Source Election Technology (OSET Foundation)
  * San Francisco League of Women Voters
  * Santa Clara County Board of Supervisors Voting Advisory Committee
  * Software Freedom Conservancy
  * Stanford University CodeX
  * VotingWorks

Public comment: None.


**4\. Approval of Minutes of Previous Meetings** (6:24 p.m.)

Public comment: None.

Member Kattouw moved (Member Hage seconded) to approve the minutes of the
February 14, 2019 OSVTAC meeting. Secretary Walker took a roll call vote. -
AYES: 3; NOES 0; ABSENT: 2. Motion carries unanimously.

Chair Jerdonek tabled consideration of the March 14, 2019 OSVTAC Minutes.


**5\. Administration** (6:26 p.m.)

Chair Jerdonek agreed to report on behalf of the OSVTAC at the next Regular
Elections Commission meeting on Wednesday, April 17.

Member Kattouw volunteered to prepare OSVTAC's next tri-annual report to
the Elections Commission.

Chair Jerdonek reported that several OSVTAC members' terms expire after the
May 2019 meeting and so will need to be reappointed.

Public comment: None.


**6\. Member Reports** (6:33 p.m.)

Member Hage provided a report of activities since the previous meeting.

Member Kattouw reported that the matching funds proposal from the
Assemblymember Santiago has been published and assigned number AB 1784. He
briefly described the requirements as outlined in the bill that would need to
be achieved before receiving either a 3-to-1 match if voting system is
developed prior to the year 2022; a 2-to-1 funds match if the system is up
and running by year 2024, or a regular 1-to-1 match should the system be
implemented by the year 2026.

Member Hage discussed issues related to the chain of custody that is
developed during the tabulation of voting results.

Public comment: None.


**7\. Digital Signatures** (6:43 p.m.)

Members discussed a number of issues related to voting system component
development, including digital signatures, SHASUM hash files, using Perl and
Python (programming languages), and signature verification software solutions.

Also discussed were digital certificates, the different state and federal
mechanisms to certify open source voting system components, methods to
systemize voting system languages, and ways to encrypt the voting system.
Whether or not to develop a glossary for the requirements documents was also
considered

Public comment: None.


**8\. Voting System Component Development** (7:15 p.m.)

A number of suggestions were made to add to the running list of features to
be included in the Open Source Voting System, including:

* Sort candidate lists generated by the voting system by last name

* Adding a table of contents at the top of quick links menu

* Having a table of contents page linked to all contests listed on the
summary page.

* Write a template loop that builds categories of subtotals, sorted to
categorical order.

* Distinguish the classification of a precinct from the classification of all
district types.

* Design larger headers

* Add wrapper script for running ORR through Docker

* Sort the ranked choice voting report rows by reverse order of elimination

* Determine how to demonstrate San Francisco ranked choice voting
methodology, such as how ranked choice votes should be displayed, how runoff
votes are reported, and how to display elections with nontraditional super
majority vote margins.

* Determine whether proposed winner status codes should be spelled out fully
or signified with single digit or letter curves.

Public comment: None.


**9\. Public Contributions to OSVTAC Projects**

The committee members brainstormed processes that could be used to review and
accept pull requests from members of the public within the constraints of the
Sunshine Ordinance.

Public comment: None.


**10\. Topics for future discussion**

Chair Jerdonek mentioned that the topic of data licensing had come up in the
past as a possible topic.

Public comment: None.


**Adjourned at 8:30 p.m.**
